--- PAGE 0 ---
SEC'...JRITY INFORMATION 
€0NFUDENTIAL Copy 
RM L52B06 
~~--------------~~---------------------------, o 
rIl 
~ C\l 
LD 
H 
~ p:; 
~ 
U 
~ 
NACA 
RESEARCH MEMORANDUM 
CASE FILE 
COpy 
APPLICATI ON OF SUPERSONIC VORTEX-FLOW THEORY TO THE 
DESIGN OF SUPERSONIC Hv1PULSE COMPRESSOR-
OR TURBll'IE-BLADE SECTIONS 
By Emanuel Boxer, James R. Sterrett, and John Wlodarski 
Langley Aeronautical Laboratory 
Langley Field, Va. 
J P ~I~ I-IIBRfl3i.R T 
GAlifORt-:lA INSTiTUTE OF TECHNOLOGY 
MAY 2 1952 
CLASSIFIED DCCUMENT 
This material contains information affecting the National Defense of the United States wlth1n the meaning 
of the espionage laws, TiUe 18, U.S.C., Sees. 793 and 794, the transmission or revelaUon of which in any 
manner to an unauthorized person is prohJblted by law. 
NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
FOR AERONAUTICS 
WASHINGTON 
April 24, 1952 
CONFIDENTIAL 
--- PAGE 1 ---

--- PAGE 2 ---
lR NACA RM L52B06 
NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AER 
RESEARCH MEMORANDUM 
APPLICATION OF SUPERSONIC VORTEX-FLOW THEORY TO THE 
DESIGN OF SUPERSONIC IMPULSE COMPRESSOR-
OR TURBINE-BLADE SECTIONS 
By Emanuel Boxer, James R. Sterrett, and John Wlodarski 
SUMMARY 
A method for designing shock-free supersonic impulse compressor 
and turbine blades in which the blade passage is essentially the space 
between two concentric circles is presented. Since the shock-free super­
sonic flow between two concentric circles is a vortex flow, the problem 
is one of designing an entrance to the circular-arc passage which will 
convert the uniform entering flow to the required vortex distribution 
and vice versa at the exit. The coordinates of many transition arcs 
have been computed and are included in tabular form. The resulting 
sections are all related to one another so that changes in the design 
variables can be investigated independently in cascade and the perform­
ance of a section for particular rotor conditions may be deduced from 
tests of representative sections. 
Three methods of increasing the thickness, particularly near the 
leading and trailing edges, are presented although not experimentally 
investigated. The passage shape was investigated for its ability to 
start supersonically and the maximum design inlet Mach number for 
starting was determined for given vortex-blade parameters. 
Cascade test results of four blade passages designed to turn the 
flow 1200 at an inlet Mach number of 1.57 showed reasonable agreement 
with predicted surface static pressures. The stagnation pressure 
recovery was approximately 87.5 percent for all sections. 
INTRODUCTION 
At the turn of the century, the newly realized potentialities of 
steam turbines led, among other things, to intensive empirical research 
into the proper shaping of impulse turbine blades or buckets for use 
U 
a ONF ID~IAL 
• \J 
--- PAGE 3 ---
....---"-- -~- ~--
2 CONFIDENrIA.L NACA RM L52B06 
with supersonic inlet velociti e s . (See reference 1.) The bucket shapes 
developed at that t i me, when little was known about supersonic flow other 
than the existence of the Prandtl -Meyer and Rankine -Hugoniot relations , 
are st i ll t he basis for design of modern impulse st eam- turbine buckets 
since no pr emium has been placed upon achieving the ultimate in 
performance . 
The present - day revolution in aircraft propulsion has brought about 
a demand for high - performance compressors and turbines and has instigated 
an intensive research in the field of high - pressure - ratio compressors 
and turbines with large flow -handling capacities , small frontal area , 
light weigh t, and high efficiency . With the development of the theory 
of the supersonic axial - flow compressor by Kantrowitz (reference 2) a 
new field of great promise in compressor research was opened . In par ­
ticular , the entirely supersonic rotor and diffusing stator combination 
suggested by Kantrowitz and discussed by Ferri (reference 3) holds 
promise of pressure ratios per stage of 6 to 10 with efficiencies 
estimated from two - dimensional cascade tests to be between 70 and 80 per ­
cent . Part of the problem to be overcome for compressors of this type 
is the design of efficient rotor -blade sections to turn the air super ­
sonically through large angles with very little or no reaction (that is , 
static-pressure rise), a requirement identical to that for efficient 
impulse turb i ne buckets. The understanding of supersonic flow has 
progressed rapidly in recent years. Liccini (reference 4) has demon­
strated that turning passages very much more efficient than those cited 
by Stodola are now possible . The analytical determination of the blade 
shape for each design by the graphical characteristic method of solution 
and check testing in cascade, however , is laborious . The purpose of 
this paper is to present an anlytical method for the design of two ­
dimensional related sections such that the selection of a blade for 
particular rotor conditions may be made quickly and easily and its 
performance deduced from tests of representative sections in cascade . 
The principal part of the turning , in what are called vortex 
impulse sections, is accomplished by concentric streamlines with a 
vortex - type distribution of velocity for which an analytical potential ­
flow solution of the equation of the characteristic or Mach lines has 
been developed by A. Busemann. A transition section at the leading 
part is used to set up this vortex flow and is duplicated at the rear 
of the symmetrical blade to return the flow to the required uniform 
exit condition. The resulting sections are related to one another so 
that changes in the design variables , that is , design inlet and exit 
Mach number , blade surface Mach numbers , and turning angles can be 
invest i gated independently in cascade . Inasmuch as most practical 
vortex sections contract the flow , it was necessary to investigate 
analytically the supersonic starting problem . In addition , several 
methods of thickening the vanishingly thin leading and trailing edges 
CONFIDE,NTIAL 
------~-------~ 
--- PAGE 4 ---
NACA RM L52B06 C ONF IDE Nl'IA"L 
which are a result of the assumption of shock-free flow are suggested 
for practical compressor-blade application. 
3 
The effects of the boundary layer upon the potential-flow solution 
were obtained experimentally by several cascade tests of typical impulse 
blade sections at an inlet Mach number of 1.57. 
A 
A* 
a 
a* 
C* 
G* 
K 
M 
M* 
m 
m/r* 
n 
p 
SYMBOIS 
area 
area when flow is sonic (for isentropic floW) 
speed of sound 
speed of sound at point in flow for which the Mach number 
equals 1.0 
lift coefficient 
speci~ic heat at constant pressure 
reduction of maximum flow rate due to curvilinear flow 
nondimensional chord (chord/r*) 
nondimensional blade spacing (2rrr/nr*) 
nondimensional vortex constant 
Mach number (V/a) 
nondimensional velocity ratio (V/a*) 
rate of mass flow 
mass-flow parameter 
number of blades in a rotor 
static pressure 
CONFIDENTIAL 
--- PAGE 5 ---
4 
p 
Q 
r 
r* 
R 
R* 
s 
t 
T 
u 
u 
v 
v 
x* 
y* 
5 
e 
v 
CONFIDElIfr L NACA RM L52B06 
stagnation pressure 
vortex - flow parameter 
radius from center of rotation of a rotor 
radius of sonic velocity streamline in vortex field 
radius in vortex field 
nondimensional radius in vortex field (R/r*) 
radius ratio (R*/Rl*) 
projection of added thickness normal to axial direction 
( fig . 9( b) ) 
temperature 
rotational velocity of rotor 
component of velocity in x direction 
component of velocity in y direction 
velocity 
of flow for given stagnation conditions 
nondimen s ional distance in x direction (x/r*) 
nondimensional distance in y direction (y/r*) 
inlet - flow angle , angle between relative flow and normal 
to rotor leading edge 
ratio of specific heats 
leading - edge wedge angle 
turning angle 
Mach angle 
supersonic property angle , angle through which flow must 
expand f r om M = 1 . 0 to gi ven Mach number 
CONFI DENTIAL 
----- ------- ------ ---
--- PAGE 6 ---
NACA RM L52B06 C ONFIDENfIAIJ 5 
p 
a 
¢ 
¢I 
Subscripts 
a 
e 
i 
1 
u 
o 
8 
2 
ratio of average outlet velocity to inlet velocity 
density 
solidity (C*/G*) 
angle between vortex radius vector and x axis, measured 
positive clockwise 
direction of flow in vortex field, measured positive clock­
wise from x axis 
stagnation pressure recovery 
axial direction 
entrance condition 
undisturbed inlet condition 
lower or concave surface 
upper or convex surface 
stagnation 
sonic 
exit condition 
A prime mark denotes conditions after normal shock. 
Blade-Section Development 
To turn a gas flow through the large angles necessary in supersonic 
compressor- or turbine-blade passages, a vortex type of flow can be 
utilized if the inlet surface is properly shaped to convert the uniform 
inlet velocity into that corresponding to vortex flow and vice versa at 
the exit. The desirability of using a vortex type of flow is evident 
when it is realized that the maximum loading for a given peak surface 
pressure i8 achieved by uniform upper and lower surface pressures attained 
through the use of vortex flow . The labor involved in obtaining a solu­
tion for a blade profile is reduced because for vortex flow the equation 
of the Mach lines can be found and , as will be shown, only the transition 
CONFIDENI'IAL 
--- PAGE 7 ---
6 e ONFIDENTIA NACA RM 152Bo6 
arcs need to be det ermined. The fact that the blades so developed are 
part of a related family is advantageous. 
Supersonic vor tex-flow theory .- As is well known, (for example, see 
reference 5), superson i c vortex flow is an irrotational flow t he stream ­
lines of whi ch are concentric circles ; with a constant velocity along 
any particular streamline. The velocity in turn varies inversely with 
radius. 
The general vortex equation 
can be rewritten 
M*R* 
VR = Constant 
= Constant = 1 . 0 
a*r* 
Restricting t he flow to the supersonic realm will limit R* to values 
between V~ : i and 1 . 0 with a flow variation shown schematically in 
figure 1. Since the magnitude of the veloci t y and i t s direction is 
known at any point, the inclination of the Mach waves through any given 
point may be determined as a function of R* as shown subsequently . 
Since the velocity is normal to the radius ( see fig . 2) ~ the Mach 
wave inclination is ¢' ± ~ or ¢ + ~ ± ~ where 
arc sin 1. 
M 
and 
M = /-C),- +-l-) 2M* ___ ~ ,- -- 1-) M-*~2 
so that the Mach wave inclination is ¢ + ~ ± arc sin i(' + l )R*: - (/ - 1) 
The equation of the Mach lines may be found by integration since the 
slope is a function of ¢ and R* . The resulting integral e quation has 
been solved in terms of M* . Rather than develop the direct solution , 
CONFIDENrIAL 
--- PAGE 8 ---
NACA RM L52B06 CONFIDENTIAL 7 
use may be made of the fact that the Mach lines are characteristic lines 
and that a functional relation between velocity direction ¢r and 
velocity ratio M* exists along a characteristic line (equations 81 
and 89, reference 6). Since M* = Jl, the equation of Mach lines can 
be written in polar form as 
¢ ±! [rr;l 
2 lV~ 
R* 
. ~Y - 1) arc sJ.n 
R*2 
arc sin [7 + 1)R*2 - 3} + Constant 
The foregoing development is based upon work done by A. Busemann 
(unpublished) . The Mach wave network in the supersonic vortex field 
for 40 incremental changes in the value of the constant is shown in 
figure 3 as originally prepared by Busemann. 
Generation of transition arcs.- The flow entering a blade section 
assumed to be uniform, supersonic, and of constant entropy must be 
deflected by uniquely shaped boundaries to set up the desired vortex­
flow pattern. In the following exposition, it is convenient to discuss 
the flow in terms of flow direction, ¢', and the property angle, V. 
Tables of functions for two-dimensional flow of a perfect gas have been 
published in many texts, but, for ready reference, the values of M, 
M*, ~,and R* as functions of v for y = 1.40 are presented in 
table 1. 
The inlet value of Ve must be reduced by means of compression 
waves to the selected value of Vl on the concave surface and generally 
increased through expansions to the value Vu on the convex surface of 
the vortex part of the blade. Along a line where ¢' = 0, compression 
waves (shown in fig. 4 as solid lines) have a negative slope and expan­
sion waves (shown dashed ), a positive one. The flow (see fig. 4) must 
be normal to the radial line through the initial point of the most 
clockwise -spaced concentric arc . Since both surfaces must turn the 
flow an equal amount , 
or 
CONFIDENI'IAL 
--- PAGE 9 ---
8 CONFIDENTIAL NACA RM L52B06 
where 6¢ is the displacement angle between the initial points of the 
concentric arcs. 
If the start of concave circula r arc is assumed to be on the 
y* axis, then the true vortex flow is bounded by the circular - arc 
surfaces and the expansion wave through ¢l ' = 0 on the concave surface 
and the compression wave which passes through ¢U ' = 6¢ on the convex 
surface up to their point of intersection. Along these principal char ­
acteristic lines (heavier lines in fig. 4) , the slope of the crossing 
characteristic or Mach wave and the flow direction is known at every 
point . There are expansion waves of total strength Vu - ve crossing 
the principal compression cha r acte ristic and total compression wave 
strength of ve - vl crossing the principal expansion characteristic. 
From the theory of characterist i cs as applied to supersonic flow, 
the direction and velocity of the flow are known to vary only across a 
characteristic line . When characteri sti cs are given a finite strength, 
the solution of a flow problem takes the form of a network of quadri­
laterals. The flow parameters within each quadrilateral are assumed 
constant. Thus, in the present problem , the transition arcs are 
generated by straight-line elements parallel to the flow within the 
adjacent quadrilateral or triangle formed by the principal and cros sing 
characteristics and the transition arc itself starting from the circular 
arcs at ¢l' = 0 and ¢u ' = 6¢ and proceeding in the counter - clockw i se 
direction until parallel with the inlet flow . Where necessary , for 
example, nonsymmetrical sections , the exit transition arcs at the trailing 
surfaces of the blade are generated in a like manner about a radius 
labeled ¢l' = 0 with the exception that signs of all flow angles ¢ ' 
are changed. 
An illustrative example of a particular design is shown in figure 4 
for an assumed inlet ve of 80 and vl and Vu equal to 00 and 200 , 
respectively . In each bounded region of flow there appear two numbers , 
the upper one of which is the flow direction ¢ ', the lower one the 
property angle V. The strength of each wave is taken to be 20 so that 
the transition arc is composed of straight - l i ne elements deflected 20 at 
the intersection with a characteristic line. 
The coordinates of a number of transition arcs obtained algebraically 
for small increments of ¢ are presented in table II for convex surfaces 
and in table III for concave surfaces . Each of the arcs orig inates on 
the y* axis for which ¢' = 0 and its length is dependent upon the 
inlet value of ve . The range of values of Ve , vl' and Vu presented 
is thought to cover foreseeable appl ications for turb ine- or compressor­
blade section. 
CONFIDENrI AL 
-- ~-~~-~, -~-
--- PAGE 10 ---
~ R NACA RM L52B06 CO' IDE 9 
Blade-section layout.- The shape of any particular section is a 
function of inlet and exit Mach numbers as well as total turning angle 
and Mach number on the circular - arc surfaces . For a symmetrical profile, 
the turning angle e is equal to twice the air inlet angle ~e' The 
concave and convex circular arcs subtend central angles of e - 2(v e - VI) 
and e - 2(Vu - ve ) , respectively. 
Once the design parameters have been selected , the flow channel 
can be constructed quite simply . The circular -ar c radiu s for the 
selected values of VI and Vu are obtained from table I and the 
coordinates of the transition arcs are computed from values given in 
tables II and III transformed by standard trigonometric means through 
an axis rotation of e/2 + (vI - ve ) and e/2 + (ve - vu ) degrees for 
the concave and convex surfaces , respectively. The convex transition 
arc is extended by means of a straight line parallel to the inlet or 
exit flow direction to the rotor leading - or trailing-edge line. To 
obtain the blade form , the convex surface is displaced a distance G*, 
as shown in figure 5, so that the two surfaces are tangent at the leading 
and trailing edges. Examples of several symmetrical blade sections 
obtained in this manner are presented in figure 6. 
Asymmetric sections may be designed similarly by treating the inlet 
and exit sections as separate layout problems . To obtain a sharp 
trailing edge, the exit area normal to the flow can be obtained from 
the familiar cascade re lation 
A2 cos ~e 
Ae cos(~e - e) 
To satisfy the equation of continuity, the design exit value of V must 
correspond to that of an isentropic area change A2/Ae . 
Although a flow passage can be constructed for any selection of 
flow parameters, prov id ed that the sum of transition turning on either 
surface does not exceed the total turning angle deSired, there are 
solutions for which a compressor - or turbine -blade section does not 
exist because the surfaces are interchanged resulting in negative thick­
ness. For most practic al selections of VI, vU' and e, however , no 
difficulty is encountered. 
Not only the blade shape but the solidity cr as well is predeter­
mined by the selection of the surface Mach numbers for a given rotor 
design. The solidity of a symmetrical blade can be determined analyti­
cally without the necessity of graphical construction . The necessary 
equations to find the solidity of a blade are given in appendix A. 
Since the mechanical design of a rotor due to blade - hub attachment 
CONFI DENTIAL 
--- PAGE 11 ---
10 ON]!. I];)ENrIAL NACA RM L52B06 
difficulties as well as the aerodynamic performance depend upon solidity, 
figures 7 and 8 have been prepared for illustrative purposes. The 
variation of solidity with turning angles for the case where 
ve = ~(Vu + VI) and each property angle is constant in turn is presented 
in figure 7. Figure 8 presents results for the case where the inter­
dependence of the property angles is removed. The lowest solidities 
are achieved when the divergence of surface Mach numbers or loading is 
greatest. For preset surface Mach numbers the solidity is affected 
slightly by a variation of inlet Mach number. 
From the aerodynamic standpoint, low solidity is desirable because 
of lower total frictional losses ; however, separation losses and out-
let flow-divergence angles will undoubtedly be greater as the pressure 
rise on the convex surface at the exit transition section becomes greater 
at low solidities. The designer's selection of a reasonable solidity to 
yield the highest efficiency is facilitated by the use of vortex sections 
since the profiles are related to one another and therefore performance 
estimates may be made by interpolation of the results of cascade tests 
of representative sections . 
Method of Creating Finite Leading-Edge Angle 
For use in a practical compressor or turbine the supersonic vortex 
sections have a serious disadvantage because of the extremely thin 
leading edges which are subject to rapid wear due to high -velocity solid 
particles in the stream and to deflection due to the pressure differential 
existing on the two surfaces . This difficulty may be circumvented by 
the means outlined subsequently to create a finite wedge angle at the 
leading and trailing edges. 
Subsonic axial velocity component .- Kantrowitz (reference 2) has 
shown that for subsonic axial velocities when expansion waves are 
generated along the entrance region (in this case the forepart of the 
convex surface) an oblique compression shock of strength equal to the 
total expansion strength will be created to obtain a steady-state condi­
tion. A small angle wedge therefore can be placed on the convex surface 
followed by either an expansion corner as shown in figure 9(a) or a 
convex arc so placed that all the expansion waves are upstream of the 
following blade. The expansion waves originating at B and the compres ­
sion shock from A being of the same fam ily will effectively cancel each 
other a short distance upstream of the cascade for axial velocities near 
sonic . The wave pattern in figure 9(a) composed of finite-strength 
expansion waves is seen to be completely cancelled within the confines 
of the figure for a group of blades. As in the case of an isolated 
airfoil in supersonic flow , the waves cancel completel y only at an 
infinite distance from the source of disturbance so that in reality it 
CONFIDENTIAL 
--- PAGE 12 ---
NACA RM L52B06 QNFIDE~IA:L 11 
is only at a great distance from the cascade that the undisturbed Mach 
number is Mi' As the fluid approaches the cascade it oscillates with 
increasing amplitude about Mi as a mean. At the entrance the flow is 
turned and expanded to the inlet value Me different than Mi to 
satisfy the equation of continuity. 
The graphical procedure used to determine Mi is outlined in 
reference 2; however, the accuracy of the method is limited and it fails 
in solving the inverse problem of interest to the compressor designers, 
namely, that of determining Me and ~e when Mi and ~i are given. 
A simpler method capable of analytic solution is presented. When 
the oblique shocks are assumed to be relatively weak, the flow process 
may be regarded as isentropic. The last infinitesimal strength wave in 
the expansion fan about B to be cancelled (see fig. 9(b)) will be the 
Mach wave associated with the undisturbed upstream Mach number Mi' If 
that Mach wave is BD, then a line FD which is tangent at D to the 
limiting streamline AC entering the passage must be parallel to the 
direction Mi, and the area normal to the flow across BD is equal to 
to Ai' The extension of line FD will pass through point E, since a 
line joining the points E and B is parallel and equal to G*. 
Because AC is a streamline and the flow in the expansion fan is 
isentropic, the change in flow direction ~i - ~e must equal ve - vi 
to satisfy the equation of continuity. 
To solve the problem analytically, ~ can be shown to be a func­
tion of Mach number since 
and 
Ae Ae 
Ai A* 
(G* - t)cos ~e 
G* cos i3 i 
Mi*~ 
+ 
1-.* 2 x-Ai Me*r + 
2 
Use may be made of the values of V 
1 
1 
and 
-2-~* r - 1 2~r:l 
A 
A* as a function of Mach 
number tabulated, for example, in reference 6 to determine the desired 
unknown through a trial-and - error selection of Mach numbers. Since the 
C ONFIDENI' IAL 
--- PAGE 13 ---
12 NACA RM L52B06 
solution is a function of t/G*, the wedge angle is not uniquely deter ­
mined. Care should be exercised in selecting a suitable angle such 
that the shock is attached and the position of the expansion corner 
permits the last wave of the fan to precede the following blade. 
Another method utilizes a shock wave originating at the leading 
edge of the concave surface which will fall inside the passage and 
therefore will not affect the flow upstream of the leading edge . The 
value ve (see fig . 9(c)) can be obtained from the oblique-shock equa­
tions (reference 6) when vi and wedge angle 5 are known. The points 
A and B are the start of the transition arcs of a p a ssage designed 
for an inlet Mach number equivalent to ve and for a turning angle 
e = 2(~i - 5) for a symmetrical section. From the point A, a straight 
line tangent to the transition arc is projected far enough forward so 
that the shock wave caused by deflecting the flow at point C intersects 
the point B on the opposite surface. The line BD is parallel to Mi 
creating an exterior corner of 50 at B. The basic leading-edge shape 
for ve is indicated by EAF. 
From practical considerations, the wedge angle 5 should be fairly 
small to yield a range of rotational speeds for which the shock will be 
attached as well as alleviating the possible flow separation at B due 
to shock - boundary-layer interaction. 
Supersonic axial-velocity component.- When the axial component of 
the relative velocity is supersonic, another method of creating a 
leading-edge wedge is to have the shock originate on the leading edge 
of the convex surface by taking care to select a wedge angle sufficiently 
small to insure the shock location within the passage (see fig. 9(d)). 
The passage in this case is designed for an inlet Mach number equivalent 
to ve and a turning angle e = 2(~i + 5) for a symmetrical section. 
The surface AC is parallel to the undisturbed inlet velocity Mi and 
at A the surface is turned sharply to cancel the leading-edge shock. 
The thinner boundary layer at A, a s compared to that at point B 
(fig. 9(c)) and the centrifugal force will materially aid in preventing 
flow separation on the concave surface at A. For this reason the 
performance would be expected to be superior to the second subsonic 
axial-velocity-component case. 
For the symmetrical se ction, the sharp corners at the trailing 
edge will give rise to trailing expansion waves and oblique shocks. To 
a first-order approximation the exit Mach number will equal the entering 
Mi and the turning angle e = 2~i for a true impulse condition. 
CONFIDENTIAL 
--- PAGE 14 ---
NACA RM L52B06 13 
Consideration of Starting Contraction Ratio 
In the design of a passage for supersonic flow , it is important to 
examine any converging port ion t o insure that supersonic flow can be 
started (see reference 7) . Most practical vortex sections contract the 
flow. In this discussion , consideration is given only to those cases 
when the minimum area occurS between the concentric circular arcs. For 
given values of vI and Vu it is possible to determine analytically 
the greatest des i gn value of ve for which supersonic flow starts in 
the passage. The flow can not be assumed one dimensional as in refer­
ence 8 because of the large velocity gradient between the channel walls. 
Since the starting Mach number depends both upon the stagnation-pressure 
loss through the normal shock and the maximum mass flow through the 
mlnlmum section , the reduction of mass flow due to curvilinear flow 
must be obtained . The maximum inlet - design Mach number will therefore 
be that design value of Mach number for which the maximum rate of flow 
can be accommodated when the normal - shock loss and the large velocity 
gradient in the concentric - arc passage are taken into consideration. 
When a normal shock is assumed to be spanning the entrance at the 
instant of starting as shown in figure 10, the gain in entropy through 
the shock will be constant so that the flow downstream of the shock will 
still be irrotational . If the circular portion of the passage is suf­
ficiently long , a vortex type of flow wil l be generated. The vortex 
equation expressed nondimensionally (developed in appendix B) is 
{Y
- l V - s = K = Constant 2 ao 
The immediate problem is to determine the constant K = ~ax for 
which the rate of flow is a maximum for a given radius ratio and stagna­
tion conditions. The derivation of the necessary equation is presented 
in appendix A and the resulting values of Kmax as a function of the 
ratio of the concave to convex radius is given in figure 11. The reduc­
tion in maximum mass flow C compared to that in a one - dimensional 
passage of width equal to the distance between the two radii is pre­
sented in figure 12 . 
The mass flow in the passage at the instant of starting when the 
normal shock spans the inlet is equal to the flow rate when started. 
The phySical area contract i on as a function of inlet Mach number and 
Vu and VI may readily be determined for the started condition . If 
equated to the maximum contraction ratio for starting , when the flow 
reduction factor C is take n into consideration the maxim~ selected 
value of Ve , for which the passage can be designed to start , can be 
CONFIDENTIAL 
----------------------.------- ---
--- PAGE 15 ---
14 NACA RM L52B06 
found. The deri vation of the equations and method of attack are outlined 
in appendix C. The limiting values of inlet ve as a function of vl 
and Vu calculated as indicated in appendix C are presented in figure 13. 
The limiting inlet Mach number, however, is not valid for the thick­
ened leading-edge sections which need to be investigated individually. 
Experimental Apparatus and Procedure 
The blade models are mounted between glass side walls in the test 
section of the 2t - by 2-inch supersonic cascade tunnel (fi g. 14). This 
tunnel is a closed -return type in which the flow i s produced by a 
compressor previously used as a supercharger on a v-1650-7 Packard air ­
craft engine . The power to operate the compressor is furnished by a 
300 -hor sepower direct-current motor. Upstream of the test section is a 
24- by 24 - inch settling chamber containing three sets of f ine screens . 
Downstream of the test sect ion is a two-dimensional diffuser of approxi­
mately 60 divergence angle followed by return duct i ng incorporating two 
aircraft type of water - cooled radiators to control the air temperature. 
An air bleed-off valve in the settling chamber is used to cont rol the 
settling - chamber pressure at from 1 to approx imately 2 atmospheres. All 
tests herein reported, however, were made with atmospheric stagnation 
pressure. Schl i eren photographs of the flow were made with the use of 
the usual two parabol i c mirror systems. 
Two blades forming one passage were used per set. The passage 
contours are accurately machined to a tolerance of O.002-inch. In 
order to gain structural rigidity near the leading and trailing edges , 
the outer surfaces were arbitrarily designed to have finite edge angles 
and therefore the blade profiles are not similar nor do they represent 
any vortex section. 
A view of the test section with one sidewall rem oved is presented 
in figure 15. The asymmetric supersonic nozzle was designed for an 
exit Mach number of 1.57 equivalent to a V of 140. A solid wood 
fairing on the convex side and a flexible -, adjustable extension on the 
concave side were used to guide the flow outside of the test passage. 
The blade models, of 2k - inch span, were mounted on dowel pins press­
fitted into bushed holes in one of the glass windows. The angle of 
attack of the blades could be varied with respect to the nozzle by 
rotating the glass . In this way the Mach number entering the passage 
could be varied within limits imposed by the appearance of detached bow 
waves on the leading edges. 
CONFIDENTIAL 
--- PAGE 16 ---
. 
NACA RM L52B06 CONFIDENI'IAL 15 
Four sets of blade s of different solidities were chosen for testing. 
Figure 16 is a photograph of one of these blades showing the static­
pressure orifices and scratch marks used to create Mach wave disturbances 
in the flow. All of the blades had a turning angle of 1200 . Solidities 
and the theoretical v values fo r the concentric axis and 'entrance 
conditions are as follows : 
Blade VI Vu ve Solidity Figure (deg ) ( deg) (deg) 
I 8 20 14 5 . 69 6(b) 
II 4 24 14 3 . 64 6(c) 
III 0 28 14 2.59 6(a) 
IV 0 24 13 2 · 70 6(e) 
In order to preven t the fami liar condensation shock phenomenon 
caused by expanding moist air, the settling - chamber temperature was 
maintained at a high temperat ure by manual r egulation of the cooling 
water flow. The operating compressor - pressure ratio for any configura­
tion was obtained by increas i ng the motor speed unt il all test section 
pressures remained unchanged wit h a further increase in speed. Total 
and static pressures were measured inside t he passage just before the 
end of the concave blade eithe r by single - or multiple-tube probes. 
Flow surveys were made at several spanwise stations for several inlet 
Mach numbers. Chordwise static - pressure orifices were located at the 
midspan of both passage surfaces. In add i tion , three spanwise static­
pressure orifices on both surfaces were located at the chordwise posi­
tion where the survey measurements were made . The inlet total pressure 
and temperature were measured in the settling chamber. All pressure 
measurements were recorded by photographing a multiple-tube mer~ury 
manometer. 
CONFIDENTIAL 
--- PAGE 17 ---
16 NACA RM L52B06 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The figures and tables presenting the test result s for the four 
passages are t abulated below : 
Blade 
Type of data I II III IV 
Figure 
Stat ·ic -pre s sure 17(a) 17(b) 17(c) l7(d) distribution 
Schl ieren photographs 19 20 21 22 
Total-pressure lS(a) lS(b) lS(c) lS(d) recoveries 
Table 
Weighted average total - IV(a) IV(b) IV(c) IV(d) pressure recoveries 
An examination of the stagnation pressure recoveries at the exit 
of the blade passages (fig . lS) makes i t obvious that the flow is not 
two dimensional. The boundary layer has "piled up" in toward the cente r 
of the convex surface. As in refe 'rence 4, there i s evidence of c ircula ­
tory boundary-layer flow down the side wall to the convex surface and 
inward toward the center of the convex blade . An explanation of this 
phenomenon can be deduced by a conside ration of the centrifugal forces 
and boundary - layer effects along the s i de wall . Out in the free stream, 
the centr ifugal force caused by curved streamlines is just balanced by 
a positive pressure grad ient (toward the concave surface) . In the wall 
boundary layer, however, this pressure gradient is greater than the 
centrifugal force; thus the flow moves down the side walls and inward 
on the convex surface. For low - aspect - ratio blades such as for these 
tests, the side-wall boundary - layer inflow effects are felt completely 
across the span at the exit of the blades. Two- dimens ional flow at 
the spanwise center of the blades could be more closely approached by 
using large-aspect - ratio blades to minimize the extent of this boundary­
layer inflow. The size of the existing equipment, however , prevented 
the use of large-aspect -ratio blades . In an actual rotor, centrifugal 
forces also exist in the spanw ise direction and therefore the results 
of these tests should be considered only as conservat ive indications 
C ONFIDENrIAL 
--- PAGE 18 ---
3R NACA RM L52B06 17 
of the performance of blades in an actual rotor . T he fact that the flow 
is three dimensional in character in these tests should be kept in mind 
when inspection is made of the schlieren photographs. 
An interesting experiment which shows the effect of this boundary­
layer inflow was conducted by pl ac i ng two boundary -layer fences on the 
convex surface of blade II, placed 1/4 inch from the gl ass wall. Each 
fence consisted of a t~in plate 1/4 inch high and extending from 10 to 
100 percent of the chord . Comparing the pressure re cove ries near the 
convex surface of this modified blade (fi g. 18 (e)) with the same blade 
(fig . 18(b)) shows that the fences have re duced boundary-layer accumula­
tion and separation . These particular dat a should be cons i dered prelim­
inary in nature as static - pres sure measurements necessary to correct 
for shock losses were taken only at the blade surfaces. 
Blade I was tested at a slightly higher than desi gn inlet Mach 
number. This higher inlet Mach number was necessary to pre vent shocks 
in the outer channels , cau sed by the conf i gurat ion of the tunnel, from 
extending ahead of the blades . The static pressures on the surfaces of 
the blades were highe r than desi gn . Thi s effec t may be due to the 
thickening of the bounda ry layer in this narrow channel. The pre ssure 
rise at the rear part of the passage is explained by the sl ight flow 
separation on the convex surface as seen from the schlieren photographs 
(fig. 19(a)), and the conse quent di ffuser effect due to r educed flow 
areas. 
static - pressure distributions on passage II are in goo d agreement 
with the predict ed values except at the rea r part of the blade where 
separation had its usual effe ct. A study of midspan pressure recoveries 
indicated a decrease in pressure re covery at the convex wall for an 
increase of inlet Mach number correspondi ng t o a c hange of ve of 10, 
(fi g. 18(b)). 
Supersonic flow in the passage formed by blade III could not be 
started at the design inlet Mach number of v equal t o 140 • The inlet 
Mach number had to be increased to v va lue of approxim ately 180 • 
Figure 21 ( a) sho ws a schlieren photograph of the passage in an unstar ted 
condition. All data pre se nted for thi s blade were t aken at an off-design 
inlet Mach number . As seen from the schlieren photograph in figure 21(b), 
the boundary layer se parated from the convex blade surface at approxi­
mately the 30-pe r cent - chord station, but was appa rently reattached a 
short distance downst ream in a manner typical of laminar boundary l aye r. 
The usual three -dimen s i ona l-fl ow effects are noted from the schliere n 
photographs and pr ess ure r eco veries. 
In figure 13 , it can be seen that , for a Vu of 
0, the maximum design entering Mach number is 14 . 40 . 
fore, should st art at its design inlet Mach number of 
CONFillENTIAL 
280 and a VI of 
Blade III, there­
v equal to 140. 
--- PAGE 19 ---
~~----- --
18 NACA RM L52B06 
In the derivations of the equations used to plot figure 13 , however , the 
effects of the boundary layer have been neglected . The presence of 
boundary layer or flow separation would decrease the maximum mass flow , 
and thus decrease the maximum design entering Mach number . Since 
blade III was designed with an entering Mach number very close to the 
limit , it is not surprising that viscosity effects prevented it from 
starting at a v of 140. 
The inlet Mach number for blade IV is greater than design by the 
equivalent of a change in v of 20 . Nosing down the blades , however , 
caused the strong shock in the outer bypass channel to extend ahead of 
the convex - surface blade. Whether this result was caused solely by the 
tunnel configuration or by the fact that the passage would not start at 
a lower Mach number was not determined . I t should be noted that this 
blade is designed close to the limiting design maximum inlet Mach number . 
The static - pressure distribution is in reasonable agreement with pre­
dicted values except for the effects of boundary - layer accumulation 
and separation at the rear of the passage . 
The variation of the mass -weighted stagnation - pressure recovery for 
all blades was small . (See table IV . ) An approximate average recovery 
of 87 .5 percent was obtained for all sections tested . Examination of 
an individual passage shows a large variation of pressure recovery at 
the various span positions which is caused by three - dimensional flows . 
A comparison of the blade loading aCL for the four blades given 
indicates that the experimental loading is approximately 90 percent of 
the theoretical value except for blade number I in which the excellent 
agreement should be disregarded in view of the marked divergence between 
predicted and measured pressures . 
aCL 
Blade 
Theoretical Measured 
I 1. 77 1. 77 
II 1.68 1.50 
III 1. 71 1.54 
IV 1. 76 1.62 
Schlieren photographs shown in figures 19 to 22 give an indication 
of the flow condition in the blade passages . It is interesting to note 
in figure 19(c) and figure 22 the close correlation of the theoretical 
vortex -wave pattern , shown by the dotted line, and the actual resulting 
waves . The shock waves at the leading edge and in the passage are known 
C ONFIDENI'IAL 
• 
--- PAGE 20 ---
NACA RM L52B06 19 
to be weak. This weakness i s apparent by the rapid dissipation of the 
downstream reflections and the "roof top" behavior of the boundary layer 
upon meeting the shock wave on the convex blade surface. This phenomenon 
is typical of a laminar boundary layer, that is, rapid thickening and 
separation of the boundary layer upstream of the shock and creation of 
expansion waves as the boundary layer is rapidly thinned behind the 
shock. The magnitude of the increased boundary-layer thickness, for 
such flows, is a function of shock strength (reference 8). 
The existence of compression or expansion waves at the exit of the 
passage can change the boundary layer upstream in the passage , and thus 
to some extent affect the separated region in the passage. This phenom­
enon acts much the same as the shock before the head of the total­
pressure probe in figure 19(a) which causes th~ boundary layer to thicken 
upstream. Although it was impossible with the existing equipment to 
change the downstream pressure appreciably, the downstream pressure could 
be varied somewhat by moving the flexible wall. An example of this 
result is shown in the schlieren photograph in figure 19(c) where the 
angle of the trailing-edge shock has been changed approximately 100 and 
the flow leaving the blade is closer to the required exit direction. No 
appreciable changes were noted in the pressure recovery due to changing 
the downstream pressure by this method. 
The results of the four-blade passages followed similar trends with 
small variations in over-all results . In general, the discrepancies 
between theoretical and experimental pressure distributions may be 
explained by the boundary - layer inflow and flow separation. These two 
effects acting together caused the pressure to rise in the region of the 
trailing edge. The data indicate that these discrepancies could be 
reduced by using suitable devices to minimize the boundarY-layer inflow 
from the side walls. Very little data are available to compare with 
the present results in order to determine whether the vortex-blade 
sections are as efficient as any other type. Some data are contained 
in reference 4, in which a pre~sure recovery of 95 percent was experi­
enced for a 900 turning passage of solidi t y 3 . 12, an inlet Mach number 
of 1.7, and designed for a static - pressure drop across the blade row. 
T"he data are not exactly comparable because of the difference in turning 
angle, Reynolds number, and aspect ratio. Stodola (reference 1) presents 
steam-bucket performance in terms of the velocity ratio W, which is 
equal to the ratio of the average outlet velocity to the inlet velocity. 
The value of W from the present tests is approximately 92 percent; 
whereas the upper limit for the data in reference 1 is about 80 percent 
when the inlet and outlet static pressure are assumed to be equal. 
Moving the concave blade of set I away from the convex blade along 
the chord bisector line in order to determine what effect misalinement 
would have on the performance reduced the midspan pressure recovery from 
95 to 84 percent for the condition shown in figure 23. The reason for 
CONFIDENTIAL 
--- PAGE 21 ---
, . , 
: 
20 CONFIDENTIAL NACA RM L52B06 
this result is obviously due to the large separation and standing shocks 
in the passage . The results of this part of the investigation point out 
the desirability of aerodynamically designing the passage even though 
the behavior of the boundary layer modified the predicted results . 
CONCLUSIONS 
A method for designing shock - free supersonic impulse compressor 
and turbine blades in which the blade passage is essentially the space 
between two concentric circles is presented . Since the shock - free 
supersonic flow between two concentric circles is a vortex flow , the 
problem is one of designing an entrance to the circular-arc passage 
which will convert the uniform entering flow to the required vortex 
distribution and vice versa at the exit . The coordinates of many tran s i ­
tion arcs have been computed and are included in tabular form . The 
resulting sections are related to one another so that changes in the 
design variables can be investigated independently in cascade and the 
performance of a section for particular rotor conditions may be deduced 
from tests of representative sections . 
Three methods of increasing the thickness particularly near the 
leading and trailing edges are presented although not experimentally 
investigated . The ability of the passage to start supersonically was 
investigated and the limiting design inlet Mach number for starting 
was determined for given surface Mach numbers. 
Four different blade passages designed to turn the flow 120 0 were 
investigated in cascade at a Mach number of approximately 1 .57. The 
specific conclusions resulting from such tests are as follows: 
1. The chordwise static - pressure distribution agrees reasonably 
well with design values . The discrepancies are explained by side -wall 
boundary - layer accumulation and flow separation . 
2 . The cascade flow was not two dimensional because of the circula ­
tory boundary - layer flow . 
3. The we i ghted stagnation pressure recovery for the enti r e span 
is approximately 87.5 percent for all sections . 
4. The r e is little data to indicate whether these pressure 
recoveries are better or worse than sections differently designed 
although the recoveries are superior to any of the steam turbine bucket 
results r eported by Stodola . 
5. The desirability of aerodynamically des i gning the passage i s 
borne out by the results obtained when the blades are incorrectly spaced . 
CONFIDENTIAL 
--- PAGE 22 ---
NACA RM L52Bo6 d ONFIDENl'IAL 21 
Future research on the vortex impulse sections to determine the 
performance for a range of design variables and effects of leading-edge 
thickness should be unde r taken because of the promising results obtained. 
Langley Aeronautical Laboratory 
National Advisory Commi t t ee for Aeronautics 
Langley Field , Va. 
CONFIDENl'IAL 
--- PAGE 23 ---
22 CONFIDENl'DlL NAeA RM L52Bo6 
APPENDIX A 
CAlCULATION OF THE SOLIDITY OF A SYMMETRICAL BLADE 
The so lidity of a s ymmetrical blade can be determined analytically 
by using the equations developed in appendix C. Equation (CTb) in 
appendix C can be rewritten 
Ae = Ae Q( Rl* _ Ru*) r*· A* 
From figure 5, it can be seen t hat 
Ae/r* G* 
sin (g - f3 e ) 
or for a symmetrical blade since 8 = 2f3e 
G* 
Combining equations (A2a) and (AI) 
Ae/r* 
cos 8/2 
(AI) 
(A2) 
(A2a ) 
(A3) 
For a symmetrical blade, the equation of the symmetrical axis (see fi g . 5) 
i s 
(A4) 
where the X* and Y* axes are a~ defined for tab le s II and III . 
The perpendicular distance from this axis to the end point XI* ' 
YI * of the concave surfa ce can be shown by analytic geometry to be 
C ONFIDENI' IAL 
--- PAGE 24 ---
NACA RM L52B06 a ONFIDENT IAJ] 23 
(A5) 
When equations (A3) and (A5) are used, the sol idity for a symmetrical 
blade is thus given by 
2fl* cos ~ - (Ve - vJ + YI* Sin~ - (Ve - VIll cos ~ 
a = ~~------------------------------------------~-----
which can be easily solved by us i ng val ues from table III, (fi g . 24) 
and the values from the following equation which have been published 
in many texts (for example , referen ce 6) . 
C ONF IDE Nl'IAL 
(A6) 
--- PAGE 25 ---
24 NACA RM L52B06 
APPENDIX B 
CALCULATION OF THE REDUCTION OF THE MAXIMUM RATE OF 
MASS FLOW DUE TO CHANNEL- WALL CURVATURE 
For most practical cases, the mlnlmum passage width which pre­
determines the maximum rate of mass flow for given stagnation conditions 
of pressure and temperature occurs between the concentric circular - arc 
portions of the throat . When only this curved region of flow is con ­
Sidered, the boundary layer being neglected , an expression may be derived 
by expressing the reduction in the maximum rate of mass flow due to 
channel -wall curvature as a function of radius ratio. 
When the normal shock spanning the entrance to the blade passage 
is assumed to be of constant strength (fig. 10) the flow within the 
passage can be considered irrotational, with a greater entropy than 
that upstream of the normal shock. For the flow to be irrotational 
and in radial equilibrium downstream of the shock if bounded by suf ­
ficiently long concentric - circular walls, it must satisfy the vortex 
equation 
VR* = Constant 
Since the flow is adiabatic and isentropic 
_ Y_ E + V2 
"Y - 1 P 2 
and 
__ Y_ Po' 
Y - 1 Po' 
combining equations (Bl), (B2), and (B3) and solving for P gives 
(Bl) 
(B2) 
(B3 ) 
(B4) 
where k -- R-1 VR* and Po' 2 ao 
equals the stagnation density behind the 
normal shock . 
CONFIDENTIAL 
--- PAGE 26 ---
NACA RM L52B06 
The mass flow parameter m* is therefore 
for r = 1.4, equat i on (B5) is reduced to an analytically integrable 
equation such that 
2 (R*2 _ k2 )3/2 ~ (R*2 _ k 2 ) 1/2 
1 5 R*3 5 R* 
25 
(B5) 
(B6) 
For all real flows , k is le ss than R*. In orde r to determine kmax J 
that is, that value of k which wi ll yield the maximum rate of flow 
between Rl* and Ru*, e quation (B5) is different i ated under the 
integral sign and equated to zero; thus , 
2 - , 
dm* = ~ fl* 
2 k2 ~ k2y-l p ,_2_ a - 1 -- + dk o , _ 1 0 Ru* r - 1 R*3 R*2 
1 
_~+ _ k2 )r-1 
dR* :::: 0 R* R*2 
for r 1.4 
CONFIDENTIAL 
