- - --- - 
a _ 
- 
- NASA TECHM-!GAL 
MEM0R.AMBU.M 
BLADE EFFICIENCY FOR TWO-DI-NSI'ONAL 
~~~*yg@;z&.g@%&qg 
a- .-L 
R@MP;c~ Gmm 
a&ekM 4135 
lysis was conducted to determine the blade efficiency for two-dimensional, supersonic 
characteristics were calculated and used to obtain the conditions downstream of the rotor 
blades after the flow had mixed to a uniform state. Subsonic and supersonic aftermixing axial 
Mach number solutions were obtained for this loss model. The effect of the surface Mach 
number levels on both blade efficiency and boundary layer separation were investigated. In 
addition, the effects of inlet flow angle and inlet Mach number on blade efficiencies were obtained. 
Supersonic flow 
"For sale by the Clearinghouse for Federal Scientific and Technical Information 
Springfield, Virginia 22151 
ANALYTICAL INVESTIGATION OF BLADE EFFICIENCY FOR PWO-DIMEN SIONAL 
SUPERSONIC TURBINE ROTOR BLADE SECTIONS 
Lewis Research Center 
SUMMARY 
An analysis was conducted to determine the blade efficiency for two-dimensional, 
supersonic rotor blade sections designed to produce vortex flow within the blade passage. 
Boundary layer characteristics were calculated and used to obtain the conditions down- 
stream of the rotor blades after the flow had mixed to a uniform state. The boundary 
layer calculations were also used to give some indication as to whether flow separation 
would occur. 
Subsonic and supersonic aftermixing axial Mach number solutions were obtained 
when the free-stream axial Mach number at the rotor exit (before mixing) was super- 
sonic. The subsonic solution corresponds to mixing plus oblique shock losses, whereas 
the supersonic solution corresponds to shockless mixing. The effect of the lower- and 
upper-blade-surface Mach numbers on both blade efficiency and boundary layer separa- 
tion were investigated. In addition, the effects of inlet flow angle and inlet Mach number 
on blade efficiencies were obtained. 
The analysis indicated that either decreasing the lower-blade-surface Mach number 
or increasing the upper-blade-surface Mach number resulted in higher rotor blade effi- 
ciencies and also increased tendency for boundary layer separation. For this reason, the 
optimum blade performance would be expected to occur for rotor blades designed so 
that flow separation is imminent or has occurred slightly on both surfaces. 
The rotor blade efficiency for the supersonic solution was found to be higher than for 
the subsonic solutionbecause of the absence of shock losses in the supersonic solution. 
For the supersonic solution, it was found that the aftermixing flow angle deflects to- 
wards the axial direction resulting in further flow expansion on mixing. This results in 
higher aftermixing Mach numbers and higher total- to static-pressure ratios for the 
supersonic solution than for the subsonic solution. 
Decreasing the inlet flow angle results in lower rotor blade efficiencies for the sub- 
sonic solution because of increased oblique shock losses. For the superSonic solution, 
little effect was noted. Increasing the inlet Mach number results in a significant de- 
crease in efficiency. 
INTRODUCTION 
Supersonic turbines have potential application in turbopump and open- cycle auxiliary 
power systems (ref. 1) where high-energy fluids are used and high pressure ratios are 
available. This has resulted in a need for design procedures applicable to this type of 
turbine. The relatively small amount of experimental data on the overall performance 
of supersonic turbines (refs. 2 to 4) does not contain sufficient information to assess the 
individual performance of either the stator or the rotor. Because of this, both are 
usually designed by theoretical methods. 
Supersonic stators and rotors can be designed by the method of characteristics as 
applied to the isentropic flow of a perfect gas. Computer programs for the design of 
two-dimensional supersonic nozzles and rotor blades have been reported in references 5 
and 6, respectively. The design of blading by these procedures must then be supple- 
mented by a knowledge of the loss characteristics of both the stator and the rotor, The 
efficiency of supersonic stators with sharp-edge throats were studied analytically in 
reference 7. Boundary layer characteristics were calculated (in ref. 7) and used to 
obtain the conditions downstream of the stators after the flow had mixed to a uniform 
state. 
The purpose of this report is to study analytically the blade efficiency for super- 
sonic rotor blades designed for conditions applicable to auxiliary space power systems. 
The rotor blades are designed so as to produce vortex flow within the blade passage. To 
obtain a theoretical estimate of the efficiency, the following calculations are required: 
(1) isentropic design of the supersonic rotor blades, (2) calculation of the boundary layer 
characteristics (momentum and displacement thicknesses) for the blades, and (3) deter - 
mination of the losses due to mixing downstream of the rotor. The isentropic rotor 
blade design is obtained from the computer program of reference 6. The boundary layer 
parameters are calculated (assuming the flow entering the rotor is turbulent) by the 
computer program described in reference 8. For turbulent flow, the program uses the 
method given by Sasman and Cresci in reference 9. Finally, the aftermixing losses are 
found by the procedure given by Stewart (ref. 10) for turbomachine blades. 
The blade efficiency for two-dimensional supersonic impulse rotor blades were 
primarily investigated for an inlet Mach number of 2.5. The effect of the lower- and 
upper-surface Mach number levels on both blade efficiency and boundary layer separa- 
tion were studied. In addition, the effects of inlet flow angle and inlet Mach number on 
blade efficiency were obtained. 
SYMBOLS 
6: blade chord, ft; m 
2 
blade spacing, ft; m 
incompressible form factor, displacement thickness divided by momentum thick- 
ness 
Mach number 
2 pressure, psia; ?X/m abs 
Reynolds number, P~V~C/P~ 
tangential direction 
velocity, ft/sec; m/sec 
axial direction 
relative flow angle measured from axial direction, deg 
rotor blade efficiency, (V;/V~, 
viscosity based on relative total inlet temperature, lb/(ft) (sec); kg/(m) (see) 
Prandtl-Meyer angle, angle through which flow must turn in expanding from 
Mach 1 to given Mach number, deg 
density, lb/ft3; kg/m3 
blade solidity, C/G 
Subscripts : 
id 
in 
2 
out 
1% 
0 
1 
2 
ideal 
inlet to rotor 
lower surface of blade 
outlet of rotor 
upper surface of blade 
station at rotor inlet 
station at rotor exit 
station downstream of rotor 
Superscripts: 
t conditions relative to rotor 
' ' total relative conditions 
METHOD OF ANALYSIS 
The calculation of the blade efficiency for two-dimensional supersonic rotor 
blades designed to produce vortex flow within the blade passage is described herein, 
The rotor blades were designed for conditions applicable to an auxiliary space power 
system similar to that described in reference 1. 
The rotor blade efficiencies were obtained by first designing a series of loss- 
free passages for given values of lower- and upper-surface Mach numbers. The boundary 
layer characteristics (momentum and displacement thicknesses) for the ideal passages 
were then obtained and the passage corrected to include the effect of the displacement 
thickness. Since the final blade profile must have equal outlet and inlet spacing (for con- 
stant mean diameter turbine), this requires that the ideal passage be designed so that the 
outlet spacing is less than the inlet spacing. This is discussed further in the section 
Rotor Blade Description and Design. The exit Mach number, flow angle, pressure ratio, 
and kinetic energy loss were calculated assuming that the flow mixes to uniform condi- 
tions downstream of the rotor. In addition, the boundary layer characteristics were used 
to give some indication as to whether flow separation would occur in the rotor. 
The efficiencies obtained in this analysis are for two-dimensional blade rows. In an 
actual design, three-dimensional effects would have to be included. A method of esti- 
mating three-dimensional efficiency from two-dimensional efficiency has been described 
in reference 11. 
Rotor Blade Description and Design 
The design of the loss-free (isentropic) blade passage is based on establishing vortex 
flow within the blade passage by a procedure analogous to that given in reference 6. A 
typical passage, designed by the method of characteristics, is shown in figure 1. The 
passage consists essentially of three major parts: (1) inlet transition arcs, (2) circular 
arcs, and (3) outlet transition arcs. The inlet transition arcs (lower and upper) are re- 
quired to convert the assumed uniform parallel flow at the passage inlet into vortex flow. 
The concentric circular arcs turn and maintain the vortex flow conditions. The outlet 
transition arcs reconvert the vortex flow into uniform parallel flow at the passage exit. 
Straight-line segments parallel to the inlet and outlet flow direction complete the passage. 
It is seen from figure 1, that the ideal passage has an outlet spacing Gout less than 
the inlet spacing Gin. This is done purposely. It will be required that the corrected 
passage (i. e., the passage corrected by the boundary layer displacement thicknesses) 
have equal outlet and inlet spacing (see fig. 2). This is possible only if for the ideal pas- 
sage Gout is less than Gin. For an ideal passage designed for impulse conditions 
Characteristic 
- Vortex 
------ transition 
A 
Figure 1. - Design of ideal supersonic flow passage by method of characteristics. 
,-Displacement thickness 
----I' 
Figure 2. - Design of supersonic rotor blade section. 
(ecgual inlet and outlet Mach liumbersj this is accomplished by having less circular turn- 
ing for the outlet portion of the passage. That is, the outlet circular arcr; JK and BE 
(fig. 1) are less than the corresponding inlet circular arcs IJ and GD, An iterative pro- 
cedure is required to find out just how much less to make JK and BE. This was done 
automatically using a modified version of the computer program described in reference 6. 
For the low flow rate open-cycle auxiliary space power systems of current interest 
(ref. I), the flow through the turbine is likely to be laminar. The calculation of laminar 
boundary layer parameters in strong adverse pressure gradients, as exist in the rotor 
passage, does not appear to be possible with existing theory because of boundary layer 
separation. In order to get an estimation of the losses in the rotor, the boundary layer 
characteristics for the ideal passages were calculated assuming the flow is turbulent. 
If the flow is actually laminar, the larger friction losses occurring would result in lower 
efficiencies than presented herein. However, the effect of the design variable on blade 
efficiency would be expected to follow similar trends. 
The boundary layer parameters were obtained using the computer program de- 
scribed in reference 8. For turbulent flow, the program uses the compressible boundary 
layer theory given in reference 9. In this method, the boundary layer parameters are 
obtained by simultaneous solutions of the transformed momentum and moment-of- 
momentum integral equations. The final blade passage is obtained by adding the dis- 
placement thicknesses to the loss-free passage coordinates. Figure 2 shows a typical 
blade section designed by this procedure. The dashed line represents the loss-free 
passage. The displacement and momentum thicknesses at the blade exit (station 1, 
fig. 2) were used to calculate the conditions downstream of the blades. 
Blade Efficiency 
The calculation of the losses due to mixing downstream of turbomachine blade rows 
has been described in terms of boundary layer characteristics in reference 10. In this 
loss model, the flow sufficiently downstream of the blade row is assumed to be uniform 
and parallel. Application of the continuity, momentum, and energy equations between 
stations 1 and 2 (fig. 2) results in the determination of the aftermixing Mach number, 
flow angle, pressure ratio, and kinetic energy loss (or efficiency). The rotor blade effi- 
ciency 7 is defined herein as 
where V; is the aftermixing relative velocity and v;, id is the ideal relative velocity at 
(a) Supersonic solution 
Flow 
I 
o i i 
(b) Subsonic solution. 
Figure 3. - Representation of different afterrnixing solutions. 
station 2 obiained by isentropic expansion to the aftermiAng static pressure p2. 
Since the free-stream Mach numbers at station 1 are supersonic, two cases are con- 
sidered for this loss model: (1) supersonic free-stream axial Mach numbers and (2) sub- 
sonic free-stream axiai IvSach numbers. These will now be discussed. 
Supersonic free-stream axial Mach numbers. - Men the free-stream axial Mach 
number at the blade exit (station I, fig. 2) is supersonic, two aftermixing solutions are 
analytically possible for the loss model of reference 10. One of the solutions results in 
supersonic aftermixing axial Mach numbers (station 2, fig. 2) and is hereafter referred 
to as the supersonic solution. The losses for this solution are the result of mixing the 
nonuniform flow at the blade exit to uniform flow. In the limit, as the boundary layer 
parameters go to zero this solution corresponds to straight-through flow. No shock 
losses occur for this solution. The second solution results in subsonic aftermixing axial 
Mach numbers and will be referred to as the subsonic solution. As the boundary layer 
parameters go to zero, this solution corresponds to an oblique shock wave occurring 
across the blade exit plane (station 1). Therefore, with a boundary layer present, the 
losses are a combination of mixing and shock losses. A schematic representation of 
these solutions is shown in figures 3(a) and (b). 
Subsonic free-stream axial Mach numbers. - When the free-stream axial Mach num- 
ber at the blade exit is subsonic, only one aftermixing solution is analytically possible 
for this model. The aftermixing axial Mach number is subsonic, and this solution will 
again be referred to as the subsonic solution. Only mixing losses occur for this solution. 
Boundary Layer Characteristics 
As described previously, the boundary layer calculations are needed to correct the 
ideal passage for the displacement thickness. In addition, the calculations also give an 
indication if the adverse pressure gradients along the blade surfaces are severe enough 
to cause flow separation. This type of information is obtained from the value of the in- 
compressible form factor Hi along the blade surfaces. A typical distribution of PIi is 
shown in figure 4. The corresponding surface Mach number distribution is shown in fig- 
ure 5. Flow separation usually occurs in the range of Hi from 1.8 to 2.4 (ref. 12). 
From figure 4 it is seen that separation is possible on both the lower and upper surfaces 
of the blade. Separation on the lower surface, if it occurs, is probably not as important 
since the flow would tend to reattach shortly downstream. The maximum value of Hi 
along either surface usually occurs on the transition arc (points I and F of fig. 4). 
1.2 0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1.0 
Fraction of chord 
Figure 4. -Typical variation of incompressible form factor with axial distance. 
Upper surface 
I I I I I I I I 
.2 .4 .6 .8 1.0 
Fraction of chord 
Figure 5. -Typical variation of surface Mach number with axial distance. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSS ION 
The results of the study of the blade efficiency of supersonic rotor blades are 
presented in this section. The blade efficiencies were primarily investigated for rotor 
blades designed for an inlet Mach number of 2.5 and inlet flow angle of 70'. The Rey- 
nolds number Re = pi~b~/pO was 35 000, and the specific heat ratio was 1.4. With the 
aforementioned conditions, specification of the lower- and upper-surface Mach number 
completely determines the blade shape, solidity, outlet blade angle (since equal outlet 
and inlet spacings are required), and aftermixing conditions. The effect of the lower- 
and upper-surface Mach number levels on the rotor blade efficiency and boundary layer 
characteristics were investigated. In addition, the effects of inlet flow angle and inlet 
Mach number on blade efficiencies were obtained. 
Blade Efficiency and Boundary Layer Characteristics at Mach Number of 2.5 
Rotor blade efficiency. - The rotor blade efficiency as a function of lower- and 
upper-surface Prandtl-Meyer angle (or Mach number) is shown in figures 6 and 7, re- 
spectively. As discussed previously, solutions corresponding to subsonic and super- 
sonic aftermixing axial Mach numbers are shown in the figures. 
The efficiency for the supersonic solution is higher than for the subsonic solution be- 
Lower-surface Prandtl-Meyer angle, vl, deg 
1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 
Lower-surface Mach number, Ml 
Figure 6. - Effect of lo:ver-surface Prandtl-Meyer angle on rotor blade efficiency for rotor blades de- 
signed for inlet Mach number of 2.5 (Upper-surface Prandtl-Meyer angle, 49"). 
1 I I 
2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3. 1 3.2 
Upper-surface Mach number, Mu 
0 
Figure 7. - Effect of upper-surface Prandtl-Meyer angle on rotor blade effi- 
ciency for rotor blades designed for inlet Mach number of 2.5 (Lower- 
surface Prandtl-Meyer angle, 34O). 
cause of the absence of shock losses in the supersonic solution. It should be noted that 
for this loss model, the work output of the turbine would be the same for both the sub- 
sonic and supersonic solutions. The rotor blade efficiency is seen to increase when either 
40 42 44 46 45 50 52 54 
Upper-surface Prandtl-Meyer angle, vu, deg 
the lower-surface Prandtl-Meyer angle (or Mach number) decreases or the upper-surface 
Prandtl-Meyer angle increases. This is to be expected since these changes increase the 
passage width which results in a smaller percentage of the passage being occupied by the 
I I 
boundary layer. These results assume that boundary layer separation does not occur 
I 
along the blade surfaces. Flow separation could lower these rotor blade efficiencies sig- 
nificantly. 
Boundary layer characteristics. - The effect of lower- and upper-surface Prandtl- 
Meyer angles on the maximum value of incompressible form factor Hi is shown in fig- 
ures 8 and 9, respectively. As discussed previously, the boundary layer characteristics 
of the rotor blades (from a flow separation standpoint) can be represented by the maxi- 
mum value of Hi on each surface. Flow separation usually occurs in the range of Hi 
from 1. 8 to 2.4. From figures 8 and 9, it is seen that themaximumvalue of Hi increases 
when either the lower-surface Prandtl-Meyer angle (or Mach number) decreases or the 
upper-surface Prandtl-Meyer angle increases. But these same changes inPrandt1-Meyer 
angle were previously found to increase the rotor efficiency. Therefore, changes in sur- 
face Mach number levels that tend to increase blade performance also tend to cause flow sepa- 
ration. A compromise between these opposing tendencies is necessary in an actual design. 
1.61 I I 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 
I 
Lower-surface Prandtl-Meyer angle, vz, deg 
1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2. 1 2.2 
Lower-surface Mach number, MZ 
Figure 8. -Effect of lower-surface Prandtl-Meyer angle on maximum value of incompressible form 
factor on lower surface (Upper-surface Prandtl-Meyer angle, 49"). 
I I I I 
42 44 46 48 50 52 54 
Upper-surface Prandtl-Meyer angle, vu, deg 
2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.2 
Upper-surface Mach number, Mu 
Figure 9. - Effect of upper-surface Prandtl-Meyer angle on 
maximum value of incompressible form factor on upper- 
surface (Lower-surface Prandtl-Meyer angle, 34"). 
An optimum supersonic rotor blade design would be expected to occur for a blade de- 
sign in which the lower- and upper-surface Mach numbers are chosen such that flow sep- 
aration is imminent or has occurred slightly on each surface. For under these condi- 
tions, it would be expected t'nat the rotor blade efficiency would be close te its maximum 
value. A similar result for more conventionally shaped cascade blades was obtained by 
Schlichting in reference 13. 
In an actual blade design, other factors such as blade solidity and supersonic start- 
ing would also have to be considered. These have been discussed in reference 14. For 
completeness, the blade solidity as a function of lower- and upper-surface Prandtl- 
Meyer angles is shown in figure 10. It is seen from the figure that the solidity decreases 
Upper-surface 
Prandtl-Meyer 
angle, 
Lower-surface Prandtl-Meyer angle, vl, deg 
1. 6 1. 7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2. 1 212 
Lower-surface Mach number, M2 
Figure 10. - Effect of surface Prandtl-Meyer angles on blade solidity. 
(number of blades decreases) as the lower-surface Prandtl-Meyer angle decreases or the 
upper-surface Prandtl-Meyer angle increases. These are the same trends that tend to 
increase the probability of separation. 
Aftermixing characteristics. - The aftermixing conditions for the rotor blades as a 
function of lower- and upper-surface Prandtl-Meyer angle are shown in figures 11 
and 12, respectively. The effect of the surface Prandtl-Meyer angles on the aftermixing 
Mach number is shown in figures Il(a) and 12(a). The aftermixing Mach number exhibits 
trends similar to that seen for the rotor efficiency (figs. 6 and 7). The aftermixing Mach 
number for the supersonic solution is larger than for the subsonic solution because of the 
absences of shock losses in the subsonic solution. 
(b) Afterrnixing flow angle. 
2.5 
sN 
L 
a, 0 
2.0- 
C 
c U 
22 
1.5- .- 
X .- 
E 
a, 
.+a 
2 1.0 
- 
1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2. 1 2. 2 
Lower-surface Mach number, Ml 
(a) Afterrnixing Mach number. 
0 .+a 
- m 
(c) Rotor total- to static-pressure ratio. 
Supersonic solution 
Figure 11. - Effect of lower-surface Prandtl-Meyer angle on afterrnixing conditions for rotor blades de- 
signed for inlet Mach number of 2.5 (Upper-surface Prandtl-Meyer angle, 49"). 
10 16 18 X) 22 26 28 30 
I I 
24 
I 
32 14 
Lower-surface Prandtl-Meyer angle, vl, deg 
(a) Aftermixing Mach number 
E '-1 / ~uoersonic solution 
(b) Aftermixing flow angle 
20 
(D .,- V) 
9 
- m + g 10 
Upper-surface Prandtl-Meyer angle, vu, deg 
2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.2 
Upper-surface Mach number, Mu 
(c) Rotor total- to static-pressure ratio. 
Figure 12. - Effect of upper-surface Prandtl-Meyer angle on aftermixing condi- 
tions for rotor blades designed for inlet Mach number of 2.5 (Lower-surface 
Prandtl-Meyer angle, 34"). 
50 
18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 
Lower-surface Prandtl-Meyer angle, vu, deg 
I I I I 
1.8 1.9 2.0 2. 1 2.2 
Lower-surface Mach number, ML 
Figure 13. - Effect of lower-surface Prandtl-Mayer angle oh rotor outlet flow angle for 
rotor blades designed for inlet Mach number of 2.5 (Upper-surface Prandtl-Meyer angle, 
49"). 
The aftermixing flow angles as a function of lower- and upper-surface Prandtl- 
Meyer angles are shown in figures Il (b) and 12 (b), respectively. The corresponding 
blade outlet flow angles before mixing (station 1, fig. 2) are shown in figures 13 and 14. 
From these figures it is seen that the flow deflects away from the axial direction for the 
subsonic solution and deflects towards the axial direction for the supersonic solution. 
The deflection of the flow towards the axial direction results in further flow expansion. 
The rotor total- to static-pressure ratios as a function lower- and upper- 
surface Prandtl-Meyer angles are shown in figures 11 (c) and 12 (c), respectively. For 
the supersonic solution the flow expansion results in lower aftermixing static pressures 
Upper-surface Prandtl-Meyer angle, vu, deg 
I 
2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.2 
Upper-surface Mach number, Mu 
Figure 14. -Effect of upper-surface Prandtl-Meyer angle on rotor 
outlet flow angle for rotor blades designed for inlet Mach number 
of 2.5 (Lower-surface Prandtl-Meyer angle, 34"). 
.51 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 
Inlet flow angle, a,, deg 
Figure 15. -Effect of inlet flow angle on rotor blade efficiency for rotor blades designed for inlet Mach number of 2.5 (Lower- and upper- 
surface Prandtl-Meyer angles, 25" and 49", respectively. 
p2 than occur for the subsonic solution. Therefore, the total- to static-pressure ratio 
is higher for the supersonic solution than for the subsonic solution. 
Effect of inlet flow angle on efficiency. - The effect of inlet flow angle on rotor blade 
efficiency is shown in figure 15. The lower- and upper-surface Prandtl-Meyer angles are 
kept constant at values of 25' and 4g0, respectively. For the subsonic solution, de- 
creasing the inlet flow angle results in a decrease in efficiency. This occurs because 
decreasing the inlet flow angle causes the outlet flow angle (station I) to decrease, which 
results in larger oblique shock losses. For the supersonic solution, the inlet flow angle 
has a small effect on efficiency. The slight increase in efficiency for high inlet angle is 
due to the decreased mixing losses which occur as the axial Mach number approaches 
one. 
Effect of inlet Mach Number on Rotor Blade Efficiency 
The effect of rotor inlet Prandtl-Meyer angle (or Mach number) on rotor blade effi- 
ciency is shown in figure 16 for rotor blades designed for an inlet flow angle of '70' and 
Reynolds number of 35 000. The maximum value of the lower- and upper-surface incom- 
pressible form factor was kept constant at a value of 2.0. As expected, increasing the 
inlet Mach number level results in a significant decrease in efficiency. For the sub- 
sonic solution, larger losses occur because the strength of the oblique shock increases 
as the Mach number at the rotor exit (station 1) increases. 
I 
1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 
Inlet Mach number, Mi 
Figure 16. - Effect of inlet Prandtl-Meyer angle on rotor blade efficiency for rotor blades designed for inlet flow 
angle of 70" (Maximum value of lower- and upper-surface incompressible form factor, 2.0). 
SUMMARY OF RESULTS 
An analysis was conducted to determine the blade efficiency for two-dimensional 
supersonic rotor blade sections designed to produce vortex flow within the blade passage. 
Boundary layer characteristics were calculated and used to obtain the conditions down- 
stream of the rotor blades after the flow had mixed to a uniform state. The boundary 
layer calculations were also used to give some indication as to whether flow separation 
could occur in the rotor. Subsonic and supersonic aftermixing axial Mach number 
solutions were obtained when the free-stream axial Mach number at the rotor exit 
(before mixing) was supersonic. The subsonic solution corresponds to mixing plus 
oblique shock losses, whereas the supersonic solution corresponds to shockless mixing. 
The effect of the lower- and upper-surface Prandtl-Meyer angles (or Mach numbers) on 
both blade efficiency and boundary layer separation were investigated. In addition, the 
effect of inlet flow angle and inlet Mach number on blade efficiencies were obtained. The 
following results were obtained: 
1. The rotor blade efficiency increases when either the lower-surface Prandtl-Meyer 
angle (or Mach number) decreases or the upper-surface Prandtl-Meyer angle increases 
(assuming flow separation does not occur). The tendency for boundary layer separation 
also increases when either the lower-surface Prandtl-Meyer angle de~reases or the 
upper - surface Brandtl- Me yer angle increases. The optimum blade performance would, 
therefore, be expected to occur for rotor blades designed so that flow separation is im- 
minent or has occurred slightly on both surfaces. 
2. The rotor blade efficiency for the supersonic solution is higher than for the sub- 
sonic solution, because of the absence of shock losses in the supersonic solution. The 
aftermixing flow angle deflects away from the axial direction for the subsonic solution, 
but deflects towards the axial direction for the supersonic solution. The supersonic 
solution, therefore, represents further flow expansion on mixing which results in higher 
aftermixing Mach numbers and higher total- to static-pressure ratios than occur for the 
subsonic solution. 
3. Decreasing the inlet flow angle results in lower rotor blade efficiencies for the 
subsonic solution because of increased oblique shock losses. For the superspnic solu- 
tion, the inlet flow angle has a small effect on efficiency. 
4. Increasing the inlet Mach number results in a significant decrease in efficiency. 
For the subsonic solution, larger losses occur because the strength of the oblique shock 
increases as the rotor exit Mach number increases. 
Lewis Research Center, 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 
Cleveland, Ohio, February 3, 1970, 
128-31. 
REFERENCES 
1. Vanco, Michael R. : Thermodynamic and Turbine Characteristics of Hydrogen- 
Fueled Open-Cycle Auxiliary Space Power System. NASA TM X- 1337, 1967. 
2. Moffitt, Thomas P. : Design and Experimental Investigation of a Single-Stage Tur- 
bine with a Rotor Entering Relative Mach Number of 2. NACA RM E58F20a, 1958. 
3. Moffitt, Thomas P. ; and Klag, Frederick W. , Jr. : Experimental Investigation of 
the Partial-Admission Performance Characteristics of a Single-Stage Mach 2 
Supersonic Turbine. NASA TM X-80, 1959. 
4. Moffitt, Thomas P. ; and Klag, Frederick W. , Jr . : Experimental Investigation of 
Partial - And Full - Admission Characteristics of a Two-Stage Velocity- 
Compounded Turbine. NASA TM X-410, 1960. 
5. Vanco, Michael R. ; and Goldman, Louis J. : Computer Program for Design of Two- 
Dimensional Supersonic Nozzle with Sharp-Edged Throat. NASA TM X-1502, 1968. 
6. Goldrnan, Louis J. ; and Scullin, Vincent J. : Analytical Investigation of Supersonic 
Turbomachinery Blading. I - Computer Program for Blading Design. NASA TN 
D-4421, 1968. 
7. Goldman, Louis J. ; and Vanco, Michael R. : Analytical Investigation of Two- 
Dimensional Loss Characteristics of Supersonic Turbine Stator Blades. NASA TM 
X-1823, 1969. 
8. McNally, William D. : Fortran Program for Calculating Compressible Laminar and 
Turbulent Boundary Layers in Arbitrary Pressure Gradients. NASA TN D- 5681, 
1970. 
9. Sasman, Philip K. ; and Cresci, Robert J. : Compressible Turbulent Boundary Layer 
with Pressure Gradient and Heat Transfer. AIAA J., vol. 4, no. 1, Jan. 1966, 
pp. 19-25. 
10. Stewart, Warner L. : Analysis of Two-Dimensional Compressible-Flow Loss Char- 
acteristics Downstream of Turbomachine Blade Rows in Terms of Basic Boundary- 
Layer Characteristics. NACA TN 3515, 1955. 
11. Stewart, Warner L. ; Whitney, Warren J. ; and Wong, Robert Y. : Use of Mean- 
Section Boundary-Layer Parameters in Predicting Three-Dimensional Turbine 
Stator Losses. NACA RM E55L12a, 1956. 
12. Schlichting, Hermann (J. Kestin, trans. ): Boundary-Layer Theory. Sixth ed., 
McGraw-Hill Book Co. , Inc. , 1-968. 
13. Schlichting, H. : Application of Boundary-Layer Theory in Turbomachinery. J. 
Basic. Eng., vol. 81, no, 4, Dec. 1959, pp. 543-551. 
14. Goldman, Louis J. : Analytical Investigation of Supersonic Turbomachinery Blading. 
I1 - Analysis of Impulse Turbine-Blade Sections. NASA TN D-4422, 1968. 
KETPLGE AND FEES PU 
NATION& AEELWAUTICS m 
SPACE ADmqT3E 
NASA SCIENmC AND TECHNICAL CATIONS 
SPECIM. PUBLIGATZONS: Mopmi* 
bc-tied from a af due .to NASA acrivitiw. 
Iri~Miatim isldttde ccwfamd 
scxrzeeM~ specit11 bibli~p@b 
TErnOLOGY rnIZA,"TZO~ 
PWmmNS: hfasmtica an t&h&m 
ud by NASA tlwr may he of pthhr 
inrerest in ramrcd and otk erm-aemspc 
applifau'ma. Pt~Mimrims inchide Td fiiefh 
Techalogy WtZiBtic&l RepaFs ass$ Nbm, 
ad Techndogy Survep 